content/ase_fsm.md, before:

+++
title = "ASE - FSM"
+++

This exercise will help you apply the concepts from the lessons through a simple domain use case. It will take you from metamodeling to interpretation and compilation. It’s also excellent preparation for your graded lab sessions on the Robots project.

In this lab, you will model a Finite State Machine (`FSM`).
An FSM is a structure used to describe the behavior of a system based on states and transitions between those states.
Each machine contains a set of states, one initial state, and transitions triggered by events.

By the end of this lab, you will have:
 - a machine (`FSM`),
 - states (`State`),
 - and transitions (`Transition`).

## Modeling a Finite State Machine (FSM) with Ecore

In this lab, you will model a Finite State Machine (`FSM`) using an Ecore metamodel.

### Prerequisites

The modeling is made with [Eclipse DSL 2025-09](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/release/2025-09/r/eclipse-ide-java-and-dsl-developers) with the added [Ecore tools 4.0](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/modeling.emft.ecoretools).

> [!WARNING]
> You have to test the Eclipse version before the first lab session or there might be problem with the last Sirius version when using Xtext2Langium in the next part.

### Ecore Metamodeling

`Ecore` is the core modeling language of the Eclipse Modeling Framework (`EMF`).
It is used to describe the structure of models, in other words, to define metamodels.
A metamodel specifies what concepts exist in a domain, what properties they have, and how they relate to each other.

#### Key Concepts

**EPackage**: A container that groups related model elements (similar to a namespace or a Java package).
It has a name, a namespace prefix, and a URI that uniquely identifies it.

**EClass**: Represents a concept or type in the model (like a class in object-oriented programming).
Each EClass can have:

- EAttributes (primitive features, such as strings or numbers)
- EReferences (links to other classes)

**EAttribute**: Defines a simple property of a class.
For example: `FSM.name : EString` means that each FSM has a string attribute called name.

**EReference**: Describes a relationship between classes. A reference can be:

- Containment: the target object belongs to the container (like composition in UML).
- Non-containment: a simple reference (like an association).

**Opposite references**: Two references can be declared as opposites to ensure consistency between both ends of a relation (e.g., Transition.src ↔ State.outgoing).

**Multiplicity**: Indicates how many elements can be linked (e.g., [0..*] for many, [1] for exactly one).

#### To start

Go to `File` > `New` > `Ecore modeling project`, name it `fsm` and open the `model/fsm.ecore` file.
You can edit it with Right click on the package `fsm` (generated when creating a Ecore project) > `New Child` > `EClass` | `...`.

You can do the same on an `EClass`: `New Child` > `EAttribute` | `EReference` | `...` .

When selecting (double click on it) a node, you can edit its properties in a dedicated window.

### FSM Metamodeling

Model a Finite State Machine (FSM) using an Ecore metamodel. To help you, here is a class diagram illustrating what is expected:

![FSM class diagram](/ase/diagram.png)


#### Known issue

If you have any problem to create a ecore project in Eclipse, you should go to:

`Help` → `Install New Software`

In the window type:

`Work with: 2025-03 - https://download.eclipse.org/releases/2025-03`

Check the box **Modeling**, then click on `Next` → `Next` → Accept the conditions using the radio button → `Finish`

Restart `Eclipse` and you should have a new entry in the menu:

`File` → `New` → `Other`, type `Ecore` → `Ecore Modeling Project`

## XText

In this exercise, you will design an Xtext grammar that defines a textual syntax for the `FSM` metamodel you created earlier in Ecore. Your goal is to allow users to describe finite state machines in a simple and readable DSL.

**Objectives**

- Understand how to map an Ecore metamodel to an Xtext grammar.
- Learn how to define rules for objects, attributes, and references.
- Write a concrete syntax that supports the creation of FSMs, States, and Transitions.

### Context

You already have an Ecore metamodel describing:

A machine (`FSM`) containing:
- one optional initial state,
- a set of states (ownedStates),
- and a set of transitions (ownedTransitions).

A state (`State`) that can have incoming and outgoing transitions.
A transition (`Transition`) linking two states (`src`, `tgt`), with optional `trigger` and `action`.

### Project

Create a new Xtext project: `File` → `New` → `Project` → `Xtext Project`.

- Project name: `fr.esir.ase.xtext.fsm`
- Language name: `xtext.Fsm`.
- Use the file extension: `fsm`.

### Define the grammar

Base it on the metamodel from the previous exercise. Make sure each `FSM` can contain states and transitions, and that these can refer to each other by name.

Use references ([Type|EString]) for links such as `initialState`, `src`, and `tgt`.

Your grammar should allow users to write files like this:

```xtext
FSM MyFsm {
  initialState "S1"
  ownedStates {
    State "S1" { outgoing("t1") },
    State "S2" { incoming("t1") }
  }
  ownedTransitions {
    Transition "t1" src "S1" tgt "S2" trigger "go" action "doSomething"
  }
}
```

### Check your grammar

Validate the grammar (no errors or warnings). Then, launch the Eclipse runtime by right-clicking on your xtext project, `Run as` → `Eclipse Application`.
In the new Eclipes runtime, aka modeling workbench, create a new project:
`File` → `New` → `Project` → `Project`. You can name it `test-fsm`.
In this project, create new `.fsm` file:
`File` → `New` → `File`, and name it `test.fsm`: Mind to type the extension, which will let your Eclipse recognize the file as a file of your fsm language.

Use content assist (Ctrl+Space) to verify that names and references are correctly resolved and check if the IDE reports any syntaxique errors, by writing wrong token such as `Sate` instead of `State`.

You can also open your `.fsm` file with the FSM Model Editor by `Right Click` on a `.fsm` → `Open with` → `Fsm Model Editor`. You will see your program as EMF models.

### Generate an Xtext grammar from ecore

Eclipse allows you to create a Xtext project based on a ecore:

`File` → `New` → `Project` → Type xtext → `Xtext Project From Existing Ecore Models`

You can check and compare the generated grammar with yours.

### Langium

If not done already, you will need to install a [node environment](https://nodejs.org/en/download) as well as [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/setup-overview), and then run the command:

```sh
npm i -g yo@5.1.0 generator-langium@3.3.0`
```

to install the Langium project generator. Then, run:

```sh
yo langium
```

to generate the project. This will offer to create a few different things; you **have to** say yes to all of them **BUT CLI**, pick a language name, extension name, and a file extension (*e.g.* .fsm).
You can also install the Langium extension from the VSCode marketplace, to have syntax highlighting and validation in your grammar.

> We use a particular version of yo and generator-langium in these labs due to the rapid change in the version of Langium.
> **Make sure that you use these versions**.

### Xtext to Langium

Fortunately, it is possible to convert an Xtext grammar into a Langium grammar thanks to [this project](https://github.com/TypeFox/xtext2langium).

To convert a grammar, go to the Eclipse menu _Help_ -> _Install new software_ -> in the site field, paste the URL `https://typefox.github.io/xtext2langium/download/updates/v0.4.0/` and install the package. Afterwards, go into your Xtext project's `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF`, switch to the _Dependencies_ tab, and in the _Required Plug-ins_ section add `Xtext2langium` as a dependency. Don't forget to save your manifest file. Then you can go to the MWE2 file (named something like `GenerateMyDsl.mwe2`) in your project, and add to `language`, the following `fragment`:

```
language {
    ...
    fragment = io.typefox.xtext2langium.Xtext2LangiumFragment {
        outputPath = './langium'
    }
}
```

Right-click the MWE2 file and run it. You should see a `langium` folder appear in your project, with corresponding `.langium` grammar files which you can put into your `src/language/` folder of the Langium project in VSCode.

Make sure the grammars names match up between your projects, otherwise you will have to manually refactor the conflicts.

## Langium Build

Once copied and adjusted, run in the Langium project, :

```sh
npm install
npm run langium:generate
npm run build
```

Hit F5 in VS Code to run the extension. A new VSCode will popup: the modeling workbench. In this new VSCode, create a file with the correct extension and test your grammar.

File example:

```
FSM DoorSystem {
    initialState Closed

    ownedStates {
        State Closed {
            outgoing(open)
            incoming(close)
        },
        State Open {
            outgoing(close)
            incoming(open)
        }
    }

    ownedTransitions {
        Transition open {
            trigger "open"
            action "open door"
            src Closed
            tgt Open
        },
        Transition close {
            trigger "close"
            action "close door"
            src Open
            tgt Closed
        }
    }
}
```

## Interpretation with Langium

In this part, you will develop an interpreter for your `FSM` language.
The interpreter allows you to simulate the behavior of an FSM by evolving a runtime state.

### Goal

Your interpreter should:
- Load an FSM model from an .fsm file.
- Start from the machine’s initial state.
- Select one of the outgoing transitions (for example, randomly).
- Apply its trigger and action, and move to the target state.
- Continue until a state with no outgoing transitions is reached.

The execution should produce trace messages in the console to show the evolution of the system.

Add a file `interpreter.ts` in `packages/language/src/`:


```ts
import { Reference } from 'langium';
import type { FSM, State, Transition } from './generated/ast.js';

export class FsmInterpreter {
    public run(fsm: FSM): void {
		...

		const ctx = new FsmContext(fsm.initialState.ref);
	}
}

export class FsmContext {
    currentState: State;

    constructor(initialState: State) {
        this.currentState = initialState;
    }
}
```

In `index.ts`, add `export * from './interpreter.js'`
	
## Runner

Now, we want a VSCode action, a kind of plugin that execute a command to launch the interpretation.

In `package/extension/src/`, a new folder `runner`, add a new  file `runner.ts` with the following code:

```ts
import { FSM, createFsmServices, FsmInterpreter } from 'fsm-language'; 
import { NodeFileSystem } from 'langium/node';
import * as vscode from 'vscode';

export async function runFsmFile(textDocument: vscode.TextDocument) {
    const services = createFsmServices({ ...NodeFileSystem });
    const document = services.shared.workspace.LangiumDocumentFactory.fromString(textDocument.getText(), textDocument.uri);
    await services.shared.workspace.DocumentBuilder.build([document], { validation: true });
    const root = document.parseResult.value;
    const fsm = root as FSM;

    if (!fsm) {
        vscode.window.showErrorMessage(`Parsing failed: ${document.diagnostics}`);
        process.exit(1);
    }

    vscode.window.showInformationMessage('FSM loaded successfully');

    const interpreter = new FsmInterpreter(fsm);
    interpreter.run(fsm);
}
```

Then, add in `src/extension/main.ts`:

```diff
export async function activate(context: vscode.ExtensionContext): Promise<void> {
    client = await startLanguageClient(context);
+    context.subscriptions.push(
+        vscode.commands.registerCommand('fsm.runFsm', () => {
+            const editor = vscode.window.activeTextEditor;
+            if (editor) {
+                runFsmFile(editor.document);
+            }
+        })
+    );
}
```
	
	
And add in `package.json`:
	
```diff
"contributes": {
        ...
+        "commands": [
+            {
+              "command": "fsm.runFsm",
+              "title": "Run FSM"
+            }
+        ]
    },
    "activationEvents": [
        "onLanguage:fsm",
+        "onCommand:fsm.runFsm"
    ],
```
	
## Build and Run

To test, open a terminal, go to `packages/extension` and run `npm run build`. In VSCode, press F5 to launch a new VSCode with our extensions.
	
In this new VSCode, :
	
- Open a `.fsm`
- `Ctrl+Shift+P` > `Run FSM`
- We should see in the console something happening.

## Compilation with Langium

In this part, you will implement a compiler for your FSM language.
The compiler will translate a textual FSM model into a Java implementation that can be executed independently.
Unlike the interpreter (which executes the model directly), the compiler generates source code following the `State` design pattern.

### Goal

Your compiler should:
- Generate JS files representing the FSM structure (machine, states, transitions).
- Implement a runtime behavior that can execute transitions and evolve between states.
- Produce files that can be executed as a standalone JavaScript program.

This process illustrates the Visitor pattern, as your compiler must traverse the model and produce corresponding code elements.

With all the knowledge accumulated, you should be able to implement this compiler by yourself.

Commit message:

Update FSM interpreter and compiler

content/ase_fsm.md, after:

+++
title = "ASE - FSM"
+++

This exercise will help you apply the concepts from the lessons through a simple domain use case. It will take you from metamodeling to interpretation and compilation. It’s also excellent preparation for your graded lab sessions on the Robots project.

In this lab, you will model a Finite State Machine (`FSM`).
An FSM is a structure used to describe the behavior of a system based on states and transitions between those states.
Each machine contains a set of states, one initial state, and transitions triggered by events.

By the end of this lab, you will have:
 - a machine (`FSM`),
 - states (`State`),
 - and transitions (`Transition`).

## Modeling a Finite State Machine (FSM) with Ecore

In this lab, you will model a Finite State Machine (`FSM`) using an Ecore metamodel.

### Prerequisites

The modeling is made with [Eclipse DSL 2025-09](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/release/2025-09/r/eclipse-ide-java-and-dsl-developers) with the added [Ecore tools 4.0](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/modeling.emft.ecoretools).

> [!WARNING]
> You have to test the Eclipse version before the first lab session or there might be problem with the last Sirius version when using Xtext2Langium in the next part.

### Ecore Metamodeling

`Ecore` is the core modeling language of the Eclipse Modeling Framework (`EMF`).
It is used to describe the structure of models, in other words, to define metamodels.
A metamodel specifies what concepts exist in a domain, what properties they have, and how they relate to each other.

#### Key Concepts

**EPackage**: A container that groups related model elements (similar to a namespace or a Java package).
It has a name, a namespace prefix, and a URI that uniquely identifies it.

**EClass**: Represents a concept or type in the model (like a class in object-oriented programming).
Each EClass can have:

- EAttributes (primitive features, such as strings or numbers)
- EReferences (links to other classes)

**EAttribute**: Defines a simple property of a class.
For example: `FSM.name : EString` means that each FSM has a string attribute called name.

**EReference**: Describes a relationship between classes. A reference can be:

- Containment: the target object belongs to the container (like composition in UML).
- Non-containment: a simple reference (like an association).

**Opposite references**: Two references can be declared as opposites to ensure consistency between both ends of a relation (e.g., Transition.src ↔ State.outgoing).

**Multiplicity**: Indicates how many elements can be linked (e.g., [0..*] for many, [1] for exactly one).

#### To start

Go to `File` > `New` > `Ecore modeling project`, name it `fsm` and open the `model/fsm.ecore` file.
You can edit it with Right click on the package `fsm` (generated when creating a Ecore project) > `New Child` > `EClass` | `...`.

You can do the same on an `EClass`: `New Child` > `EAttribute` | `EReference` | `...` .

When selecting (double click on it) a node, you can edit its properties in a dedicated window.

### FSM Metamodeling

Model a Finite State Machine (FSM) using an Ecore metamodel. To help you, here is a class diagram illustrating what is expected:

![FSM class diagram](/ase/diagram.png)


#### Known issue

If you have any problem to create a ecore project in Eclipse, you should go to:

`Help` → `Install New Software`

In the window type:

`Work with: 2025-03 - https://download.eclipse.org/releases/2025-03`

Check the box **Modeling**, then click on `Next` → `Next` → Accept the conditions using the radio button → `Finish`

Restart `Eclipse` and you should have a new entry in the menu:

`File` → `New` → `Other`, type `Ecore` → `Ecore Modeling Project`

## XText

In this exercise, you will design an Xtext grammar that defines a textual syntax for the `FSM` metamodel you created earlier in Ecore. Your goal is to allow users to describe finite state machines in a simple and readable DSL.

**Objectives**

- Understand how to map an Ecore metamodel to an Xtext grammar.
- Learn how to define rules for objects, attributes, and references.
- Write a concrete syntax that supports the creation of FSMs, States, and Transitions.

### Context

You already have an Ecore metamodel describing:

A machine (`FSM`) containing:
- one optional initial state,
- a set of states (ownedStates),
- and a set of transitions (ownedTransitions).

A state (`State`) that can have incoming and outgoing transitions.
A transition (`Transition`) linking two states (`src`, `tgt`), with optional `trigger` and `action`.

### Project

Create a new Xtext project: `File` → `New` → `Project` → `Xtext Project`.

- Project name: `fr.esir.ase.xtext.fsm`
- Language name: `xtext.Fsm`.
- Use the file extension: `fsm`.

### Define the grammar

Base it on the metamodel from the previous exercise. Make sure each `FSM` can contain states and transitions, and that these can refer to each other by name.

Use references ([Type|EString]) for links such as `initialState`, `src`, and `tgt`.

Your grammar should allow users to write files like this:

```xtext
FSM MyFsm {
  initialState "S1"
  ownedStates {
    State "S1" { outgoing("t1") },
    State "S2" { incoming("t1") }
  }
  ownedTransitions {
    Transition "t1" src "S1" tgt "S2" trigger "go" action "doSomething"
  }
}
```

### Check your grammar

Validate the grammar (no errors or warnings). Then, launch the Eclipse runtime by right-clicking on your xtext project, `Run as` → `Eclipse Application`.
In the new Eclipes runtime, aka modeling workbench, create a new project:
`File` → `New` → `Project` → `Project`. You can name it `test-fsm`.
In this project, create new `.fsm` file:
`File` → `New` → `File`, and name it `test.fsm`: Mind to type the extension, which will let your Eclipse recognize the file as a file of your fsm language.

Use content assist (Ctrl+Space) to verify that names and references are correctly resolved and check if the IDE reports any syntaxique errors, by writing wrong token such as `Sate` instead of `State`.

You can also open your `.fsm` file with the FSM Model Editor by `Right Click` on a `.fsm` → `Open with` → `Fsm Model Editor`. You will see your program as EMF models.

### Generate an Xtext grammar from ecore

Eclipse allows you to create a Xtext project based on a ecore:

`File` → `New` → `Project` → Type xtext → `Xtext Project From Existing Ecore Models`

You can check and compare the generated grammar with yours.

### Langium

If not done already, you will need to install a [node environment](https://nodejs.org/en/download) as well as [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/setup-overview), and then run the command:

```sh
npm i -g yo@5.1.0 generator-langium@3.3.0`
```

to install the Langium project generator. Then, run:

```sh
yo langium
```

to generate the project. This will offer to create a few different things; you **have to** say yes to all of them **BUT CLI**, pick a language name, extension name, and a file extension (*e.g.* .fsm).
You can also install the Langium extension from the VSCode marketplace, to have syntax highlighting and validation in your grammar.

> We use a particular version of yo and generator-langium in these labs due to the rapid change in the version of Langium.
> **Make sure that you use these versions**.

### Xtext to Langium

Fortunately, it is possible to convert an Xtext grammar into a Langium grammar thanks to [this project](https://github.com/TypeFox/xtext2langium).

To convert a grammar, go to the Eclipse menu _Help_ -> _Install new software_ -> in the site field, paste the URL `https://typefox.github.io/xtext2langium/download/updates/v0.4.0/` and install the package. Afterwards, go into your Xtext project's `META-INF/MANIFEST.MF`, switch to the _Dependencies_ tab, and in the _Required Plug-ins_ section add `Xtext2langium` as a dependency. Don't forget to save your manifest file. Then you can go to the MWE2 file (named something like `GenerateMyDsl.mwe2`) in your project, and add to `language`, the following `fragment`:

```
language {
    ...
    fragment = io.typefox.xtext2langium.Xtext2LangiumFragment {
        outputPath = './langium'
    }
}
```

Right-click the MWE2 file and run it. You should see a `langium` folder appear in your project, with corresponding `.langium` grammar files which you can put into your `src/language/` folder of the Langium project in VSCode.

Make sure the grammars names match up between your projects, otherwise you will have to manually refactor the conflicts.

## Langium Build

Once copied and adjusted, run in the Langium project, :

```sh
npm install
npm run langium:generate
npm run build
```

Hit F5 in VS Code to run the extension. A new VSCode will popup: the modeling workbench. In this new VSCode, create a file with the correct extension and test your grammar.

File example:

```
FSM DoorSystem {
    initialState Closed

    ownedStates {
        State Closed {
            outgoing(open)
            incoming(close)
        },
        State Open {
            outgoing(close)
            incoming(open)
        }
    }

    ownedTransitions {
        Transition open {
            trigger "open"
            action "open door"
            src Closed
            tgt Open
        },
        Transition close {
            trigger "close"
            action "close door"
            src Open
            tgt Closed
        }
    }
}
```

## Interpretation with Langium

In this part, you will develop an interpreter for your `FSM` language.
The interpreter allows you to simulate the behavior of an FSM by evolving a runtime state.

### Goal

The interpreter algorithm should:
- Load an FSM model from an .fsm file.
- Start from the machine’s initial state.
- Select one of the outgoing transitions (for example, randomly).
- Apply its trigger and action, and move to the target state.
- Continue until a state with no outgoing transitions is reached (terminal state) or a given number (_e.g._ 10) of transitions has been executed.

**The execution should produce trace messages in the console (`console.log('...')`) to show the evolution of the system.**

Add a file `interpreter.ts` in `language`:


```ts
import { Reference } from 'langium';
import type { FSM, State, Transition } from './generated/ast.js';

export class FsmInterpreter {
    public run(fsm: FSM): void {
		const ctx = new FsmContext(fsm.initialState.ref);
        /* FSM interpreter algorithm goes there */
	}
}

export class FsmContext {
    currentState: State;

    constructor(initialState: State) {
        this.currentState = initialState;
    }
}
```

In `index.ts`, add `export * from './interpreter.js'`
	
## Runner

Now, we want a VSCode action, a kind of plugin that execute a command to launch the interpretation.

In `extension`, a new folder `runner`, add a new  file `runner.ts` with the following code:

```ts
import { FSM, createFsmServices, FsmInterpreter } from 'fsm-language'; 
import { NodeFileSystem } from 'langium/node';
import * as vscode from 'vscode';

export async function runFsmFile(textDocument: vscode.TextDocument) {
    const services = createFsmServices({ ...NodeFileSystem });
    const document = services.shared.workspace.LangiumDocumentFactory.fromString(textDocument.getText(), textDocument.uri);
    await services.shared.workspace.DocumentBuilder.build([document], { validation: true });
    const root = document.parseResult.value;
    const fsm = root as FSM;

    if (!fsm) {
        vscode.window.showErrorMessage(`Parsing failed: ${document.diagnostics}`);
        process.exit(1);
    }

    vscode.window.showInformationMessage('FSM loaded successfully');

    const interpreter = new FsmInterpreter(fsm);
    interpreter.run(fsm);
}
```

Then, add in `main.ts` from `extension`:

```diff
export async function activate(context: vscode.ExtensionContext): Promise<void> {
    client = await startLanguageClient(context);
+    context.subscriptions.push(
+        vscode.commands.registerCommand('fsm.runFsm', () => {
+            const editor = vscode.window.activeTextEditor;
+            if (editor) {
+                runFsmFile(editor.document);
+            }
+        })
+    );
}
```
	
	
And add in `package.json`:
	
```diff
"contributes": {
        ...
+        "commands": [
+            {
+              "command": "fsm.runFsm",
+              "title": "Run FSM"
+            }
+        ]
    },
    "activationEvents": [
        "onLanguage:fsm",
+        "onCommand:fsm.runFsm"
    ],
```
	
## Build and Run

To test, open a terminal, go to `extension` folder and run `npm run build`. 
In VSCode, press F5 to launch a new VSCode with our extensions.
	
In this new VSCode, :
	
- Open a `.fsm` file
- `Ctrl+Shift+P`, then type: `> Run FSM`
- You should see in the console of the VSCode containing the interpreter (language workbench), the traces of your `console.log()`.

## Compilation with Langium

In this part, you will implement a compiler for your FSM language.
The compiler will translate a textual FSM model into a JavaScript implementation that can be executed independently.
Unlike the interpreter (which executes the model directly), the compiler generates source code following the `State` design pattern.

### Goal

Your compiler should:
- Generate JavaScript files representing the FSM structure (machine, states, transitions).
- Implement a runtime behavior that can execute transitions and evolve between states.
- Produce files that can be executed as a standalone JavaScript program.

This process illustrates the Visitor pattern, as your compiler must traverse the model and produce corresponding code elements.

With all the knowledge accumulated, you should be able to implement this compiler by yourself, in particular, based on what we did for the intrepreter.

Do not forget to:
- Update the `main.ts` from `extension`
- Update the `package.json`
- Run `npm run build` in the `extension`
