content/research.md, before:

+++
title = "Research"
+++

## Research

Overall, my research project aims to facilitate and improve software development. 
For this, I am interested in the **development of Domain-Specific Modeling Languages** which have shown their effectiveness in the world of software development, thanks to a set of features such as abstraction, verification, code generation and many others.
More specifically, **my research aims to provide languages and tools to model, verify and ease software development of heterogeneous distributed systems like Cloud Computing.**

My research interests include:

- ***Model-Driven Engineering***
- ***Software Language Engineering***
- ***Reverse-Engineering***
- ***Model Verification & Validation***
- ***REST APIs***
- and ***Cloud Computing***
	
---

**Thesis supervision:**
- Anne Bumiller, October 2020 - November 2023, **“Contextual modeling of adaptive authentication systems”**, co-supervision: [Benoit Combemale](https://people.irisa.fr/Benoit.Combemale/), [Olivier Barais](https://olivier.barais.fr/)

--- 

**Internships supervision**
- Yazid Benjamaa, June 12 - September 15, 2023, **“A DSL for specifying DevSecOps tools”**
- Mouna Hissane, May 01 - August 31, 2021, **“A model-driven approach for analyzing security of Cloud APIs”**, co-supervision: [Nan Messe](https://nanzhangmesse.github.io/"), [Olivier Barais](https://olivier.barais.fr/)
- Léo Rolland, June 07 - August 27, 2021, **“A technical dive into software cloudification”**, co-supervision: [Benoit Combemale](https://people.irisa.fr/Benoit.Combemale/), [Olivier Barais](https://olivier.barais.fr/)

---

I have [open positions](../positions) and I am always looking for competent and motivated students to join us in [DiverSE](https://www.diverse-team.fr/).
Contact me on <i class="fa-regular fa-envelope"></i> stephanie{dot}challita{at}inria{dot}fr.

Commit message:

Add grants and Update Activities

content/research.md, after:

+++
title = "Research"
+++

## Research

Overall, my research project aims to facilitate and improve software development. 
For this, I am interested in the **development of Domain-Specific Modeling Languages** which have shown their effectiveness in the world of software development, thanks to a set of features such as abstraction, verification, code generation and many others.
More specifically, **my current research aims to provide languages and tools to model, verify and ease software development of REST APIs.**

My research interests include:

- ***REST APIs***
- ***Model-Driven Engineering***
- ***Software Language Engineering***
- ***Reverse-Engineering***
- ***Model Verification & Validation***
- and ***Cloud Computing***
	
---

**Thesis supervision:**
- Anne Bumiller, October 2020 - November 2023, **“Contextual modeling of adaptive authentication systems”**, co-supervision: [Benoit Combemale](https://people.irisa.fr/Benoit.Combemale/), [Olivier Barais](https://olivier.barais.fr/)

--- 

**Internships supervision**
- Yazid Benjamaa, June 12 - September 15, 2023, **“A DSL for specifying DevSecOps tools”**
- Mouna Hissane, May 01 - August 31, 2021, **“A model-driven approach for analyzing security of Cloud APIs”**, co-supervision: [Nan Messe](https://nanzhangmesse.github.io/"), [Olivier Barais](https://olivier.barais.fr/)
- Léo Rolland, June 07 - August 27, 2021, **“A technical dive into software cloudification”**, co-supervision: [Benoit Combemale](https://people.irisa.fr/Benoit.Combemale/), [Olivier Barais](https://olivier.barais.fr/)

---

**Awards & Grants**  
- **Allocations d'Installation Scientifique (AIS)** from Rennes Métropole (10k €), 2024

- **Installation Package at IRISA** from CNRS (5k €), 2021 

- **L'Oréal-UNESCO Fellowship for Women in Science** (15k €), 2018 

---

I have [open positions](../positions) and I am always looking for competent and motivated students to join us in [DiverSE](https://www.diverse-team.fr/).
Contact me on <i class="fa-regular fa-envelope"></i> stephanie{dot}challita{at}inria{dot}fr.
